Okay, it's running.
Okay, we're talking to Johanna Fiedler.
And reading a piece in the Globe, I guess, there's a suggestion that maybe you had second thoughts about having done such a...
a brutally honest book about your father.
I wonder, is that the case, or do you think that now, thinking about it, you might have done it differently than you had?
That's just an opening.
Have you read the book?
Yes, I have.
Yeah, because, I mean, I really honestly felt that the... One of the things that I'm finding is that a book about a family, and particularly in Boston about this family, brings up very strong feelings in people.
Because I really don't see my book as so brutal, to use your word.
Well, and it's not my word.
I'm just, I was kind of surprised, actually, by the piece in the Globe.
I mean, it even suggests that maybe you shouldn't have done it, you know, and I'm wondering where...
where she's coming from on that.
I honestly don't know the answer to that.
I mean, she told me very directly that she just hated the book.
Oh, is that right?
It was a very bitter and angry book, which is not how the book was made.
Yeah, well, she shouldn't have been assigned to the story then.
Yeah.
It surprised me, you know, actually.
It surprised me quite a lot.
I mean, you know, I expected a strong reaction, and I know the other thing is that, you know, somebody who hasn't read the book basically is going to have a preconceived notion of what it's about.
and I know that a lot of people don't have time to read it, but I wrote it because I wanted to... There were a couple of reasons.
I wanted to sort of deal with the relationship I had with my father, which in some ways was almost too close, and to try to sort that out a little bit.
I also had very strong feelings about the way he'd been treated by the Boston Symphony.
That apparently continues to bother you.
Yes, it does.
You might even get into that a little bit, if you'd like.
And the fact is that one of the things I had to sort of defend myself against was being too overprotective of him, which is sort of the opposite of what people are now.
You mean over the years or in this book?
I think over the years I saw, especially after he died, I was outraged by what happened to him, especially after he died with the symphony, but also for many years before.
And I had to finally come to the conclusion that it wasn't
a battle for me to continue fighting.
What particularly outraged you?
I think the whole business about promising to name the wing of Symphony Hall after him and promising to make a library for his scores, because he has an enormous selection of scores.
And then almost the kind of...
What's the word they used to use in the Soviet Union when they kind of rearrange history?
Oh, I... So, you know, in order to give John Williams a chance, it would almost have to be that my father hadn't existed, which I think is unfair both to my father and to John Williams, who can do quite fine on his own.
And, in fact, he did, actually.
Yes, he did.
Who had they made, had they made such a commitment to, or just kind of all verbal stuff?
Well, it's actually in the book.
There was, in fact, there was an article in the Globe about how the trustees had found a press release announcing that they were going to name the new wing after Papa.
Because I remember we used to joke about the Fiedler wing, like the chicken wing.
And I quote all of that in the book, the actual press release.
And then, with no explanation, it suddenly became the Cohen wing.
Jeez.
And my mother finally got tired of them saying, oh, yes, we're going to do something with the scores at some point.
Meantime, they were sitting in the cellar of Symphony Hall rotting away.
So she took them back and gave them to Boston University, who, in fact, have now built a beautiful library for them.
Yeah, that's great.
Howard Gottlieb is the... He's wonderful.
Yeah, he's great, and he really, he's perfect for 20th century things, too, which is the subject of a book that I've just written, by the way.
Oh, congratulations.
Thanks.
20th century.
No, that's just a second.
It's actually about bibliomania, book collecting by individuals and institutions and preservation of things like that.
I mean, that must be a fascinating subject these days with computers.
Well, thankfully there will always be books, you know.
I mean, I think one of the things that most writers worry about is not being able to look at, you know, the early drafts.
There are no more.
Yeah, that's the truth.
And did you write this on a computer yourself, for instance?
I printed out every draft.
Did you?
Mostly as a lesson to myself in some ways, so that, you know, I could look back and see.
Because, I mean, everybody makes.
has their own set of mistakes that they make over and over again.
Of course, yeah.
One of the problems with being a writer is that
Because you don't get any feedback until the book is published, you keep making the same decisions.
Isn't it?
I mean, and that is the difference between you, especially coming from a musical family.
The rewards are immediate, aren't they?
They are, yes.
As opposed to the book, you have no idea until it's out there.
Yes, a desire for immediate gratification.
Right.
Something that goes out of your life.
Now, you did intend at one point to write a novel.
Yes, I did.
And later decided, heck with it, let's do it straight out carefully.
Yeah, somebody actually said something to me yesterday that, you know, because I said one of the things that, you know, I was finding very painful to deal with is that nobody seems to be looking at this as a piece of writing.
I worked so hard on it.
And he said in that situation, probably it would have been better to write it as fiction, that some people might have looked at the writing more closely.
Well, would it have been as a novel?
I mean, a Finley, a Romana Clay?
Not the way I was writing it.
It was dealing with the issues without dealing with the facts.
And, you know, in fact, it has been very good for me to sort of say this is what happened and look at it in chronological order.
And it's been great to get it all in perspective.
Mm-hmm.
What are some of the misconceptions that people had about your father that you think?
I mean, certainly while he was alive, he was revered.
I mean, do you think that perhaps this does kind of, is kind of an iconoclastic thing in a way that might tarnish the reputation that he had?
I don't think so.
First of all, my father, I mean, I don't know if you ever met him.
Never did, no.
He was...
If he had a Santa Claus image, it was no thanks to him.
He was a very crusty cantankerous person.
And he never made the slightest effort to hide that.
And people see what they want to see.
They loved him, though.
I mean, I saw him perform, you know, numbers of times out here in the Worcester area.
He loved Worcester.
That place where the belly dancers were.
That's right, the El Morocco.
He conducted Worcester whenever he could.
Yeah, and they took good care of him up there too, the Booty brothers.
But yeah, my father loved to eat and he loved to drink and he loved women and that going to El Morocco is part of his enjoyment of life.
Yeah.
Of course, the book does speak for itself, so we are dancing around here, which is important, but I am looking for... I read also where you have had some therapy for your own problems.
Did you find that the writing of this book was a therapeutic exercise for you?
Yes, that's not really the reason I did it, but of course it does have that side effect.
I think it's important to point that out, that you didn't do this as a way to exorcise the demons, so to speak, but it did serve that for you.
It definitely, especially coming back here and also dealing with my feelings about Boston, which have a lot to do with my feelings about my parents.
I can see that it's had a really big effect.
It's not something that you see, you don't write a book and think, ah, I'm all integrated now.
You kind of write the book and then you gradually see the effect it's had on your life.
I mean, spending three years doing something like this and thinking over things, I think has had some kind of beneficial effect, at least I hope so.
That's good.
How have the siblings responded to the book?
I'm sure that they have mixed feelings, but they could not have been nicer, and the
The thing that I expected the least is that it's actually brought us closer together.
In fact, we have not spent a holiday together since my mother died, and we're going to spend Thanksgiving together this year.
Well, that's nice.
Up here?
My sister's in New York.
That's encouraging, isn't it?
No, I mean, my sister said you could have changed my name for hers all the way to the early part of the book, and it was her experience exactly.
She was stunned that I felt the same things that she did.
Except that you were kind of closer to your father, though, being the oldest.
Yes, yeah.
Did that have its special pitfalls, being the oldest child?
I think so, because he was such a sort of dominating personality that I started to define myself in terms of him and closeness to him.
And because that was my place in the family, being Papa's so-called favorite, it became, you know, that became my way of feeling good about myself, which is not a good way to feel good about yourself.
You are a writer now, a published author.
Congratulations.
Thank you.
I mean, I would hope that, I mean, there is a wonderful review in the Wall Street Journal on this book.
I was thrilled by that because I thought he really understood.
It came out the same day as the Globe interview.
Oh, is that right?
It's one of those, the Lord give us and the Lord take us away.
Yeah.
Well, the globe thing is not a review either.
I mean, everybody read it that way.
Obviously, you know because you're in the profession.
Yeah, but I mean, I read it straight away.
And I said, and one of the first things you teach people is, I mean, don't be negative at the beginning.
Give people a reason to read your story.
Never say what a book isn't.
I mean, because then, you know, then what's the point of doing the story?
I mean...
And there's one who used to assign books to a review.
I mean, if people come with this kind of baggage, you know, maybe I ought to be giving it to somebody else.
Well, somebody said to me, you know, where was her editor?
You don't have editors at the Globe anymore.
Well, you know, but then maybe the editor audited it too, you know.
i mean sometimes you get what you want by giving it to a certain person without having without i mean that's the way this this business unfortunately is uh and yet your father's recordings continue to uh his music continues to be a source of uh of uh reward for the boston symphony isn't that right yes it certainly does i mean did you think they saw him as the cash cow so to speak
I think in some ways they still do.
One of the trustees who I met at a dinner party at Martha's Vineyard said to me recently that the symphony's very happy still to be receiving these very nice royalties from his recordings because the symphony gets most of them because of the contract he signed.
I was surprised that your father really...
I mean, even as recently as the 1970s, that he really wasn't making a tremendous amount of money.
Well, you see, that was one of the misconceptions which in some ways he fostered.
He liked the idea that people thought he was very rich and that he was making lots of money when, in fact, he really wasn't.
Because it may, I mean, you know, in some ways since he was not able to, what's the word, to kind of produce that for himself, he didn't mind the fact that people thought that was happening even though it wasn't.
What would you like your father's legacy to be?
You know, one of the things I think musically, since music was the most important thing to him, that I think that the world could really use another one of him right now, or another Leonard Bernstein, or someone who makes music so accessible to people.
That, you know, he felt so strongly, you know, when he started out his career, music was really something that was for the elite, for the wealthy.
And he tried very hard to change that.
He mindfully set about doing this, didn't he?
That's where the Esplanade concerts came from.
They were the first free symphony concerts ever given in this country.
And did he do this because he had a respect for people, or do you think maybe... Yes, he really felt that, you know, the idea that music was something he used to say, you shouldn't have to listen to it with your head and your hands.
Mm-hmm.
He said music is something to be enjoyed, and he loved music the way he loved... I mean, he really loved life.
And music was something that he really enjoyed, and he couldn't understand why people took it in some way so seriously.
I mean, he took it very seriously, but he also enjoyed it.
And he thought it was very sad that that was not a general feeling.
And it seems to me that classical music could really use that now.
Now, I've seen two...
references, several references, that suggest this... I mean, I know you must hate this question, but how do you respond to suggestions that this is kind of a Papa Dearest treatment, even though a reading of the book clearly shows that it is not, you know?
I mean, the fact is that most people who ask me that haven't read the book.
That's right.
I mean, I was on that...
There's this new television network called America's Talking, and I was on one of their shows, which was a call-in thing, and one of the people who called in was Christina Crawford.
Jesus.
Well, she's promoting her latest book.
Uh-huh.
But, I mean, she said, you know, I was the forerunner of all these books, and I thought, yeah, you're responsible.
You're responsible for the stereotype, too, unfortunately.
Yeah.
Would you describe it as a loving memoir?
I love it.
I think candid but loving, yes.
I don't think that loving necessarily means that you don't see the negative qualities.
That's right.
um i'm the only person in boston that way right now well see he does he does retain his his uh his almost mythical stature doesn't he i think it's even grown a bit especially since he's not around he bore and yell at people come to get his autograph yeah but i mean that is the problem that is that is a problem isn't it when you try to write honestly about a human being who has taken on uh also very especially true in boston i mean the other cities i've been to um
He's a popular figure, but he doesn't have this mythic quality.
It is paradoxical, then, that they don't recognize him at the symphony, then, isn't it?
Yeah.
Given that?
Absolutely.
I mean, do you think it's institutional and it's petty and it's inside?
I can't explain.
I don't understand it.
I really don't.
I mean, partly it's that the current administration are people that didn't know him.
that, you know, sort of, and there was this concerted effort in the past to kind of basically blunt his image so that John Williams could develop his own following.
Well, so Williams is leaving, though.
That's right, and now there's nobody.
Yeah.
I mean, there's a plaque over there for the musicians on the Titanic.
And there's not, my father's, you realize, there's no picture of my father.
Yeah, no, I was there for the opening the other night, and having already, you know, been aware of what you say here, looking around, and...
Not so much seeing who isn't there, but seeing who is there.
And contrast, you know, by contrast.
No, I mean, I was at Tanglewood this summer and I went through the new hall and some of the new buildings.
They have a new sort of kind of place where people who give lots of money can go and sit and be comfortable before the concert.
And there are pictures of people who have appeared with the orchestra over the years, you know, soloists and guest conductors.
Not one picture of my father.
And that really hurts.
As much as I try to tell myself it's not my battle, it still hurts.
How can a book like this be instructive for other children of famous people, or did you have that at all in mind when you wrote the book?
Well, if it could be, I'd be sort of happy, I guess.
I'm not sure.
It's not something you have to come to by yourself.
And you certainly had your own personal problems, which you get into in the book.
Yes, I did.
Which don't need to be elaborated upon here.
I'm sorry.
I'm all over the block this morning.
You'll have to forgive me.
That's okay.
I'm sure you're probably exhausted.
I'm not only... I'm under... My edited manuscript is back from New York.
It was due in the 3rd, which was, what, Monday.
You know they give you false deadlines.
Don't worry.
I know.
And he already told me.
And you know what it is?
It's a 900-page manuscript, too.
Good Lord.
And they hired a copy editor...
i've got to meet this woman when it's over she's not from boston she is from somerville and it was pixie no her name is kate scott because mine was also from boston her name was pixie i have to call her they have great characters these people oh i mean i i owe so much to this woman and then i i i've called my editor twice now ellen peacock at home i said ellen
You've got to give me this woman's phone number.
He said, why?
What do you want?
I mean, she's very defensive.
I said, I want to call her and thank her, you know, and ask her a few points.
But, I mean, she has found things.
It was like a graduate course in writing.
Jesus.
Well, I have a line there, something about which can be summarized briefly.
And she takes out the briefly.
Exactly.
He says, what's the summary after all?
You know, you love it, you know.
And she insults you when you're stupid, too, which I like, you know, the margins.
So I've got, as a fact book, as is yours, you know, they check everything.
It's not like fiction where you can use any old... I also, by the way, gave part of the manuscript to the Boston Symphony to fact check because I wanted to be absolutely sure my facts were correct.
And in fact, I had Kuzovitsky's death date wrong, which they caught.
So I'm absolutely confident that the facts in the book are accurate.
That's interesting.
Did they comment on anything?
Did they question anything?
I think Kenneth Haas told Richard Dyer from The Globe that he thought it was well written, actually.
What would you like to write next?
Did I ask you that?
No, actually, I'm just finishing a novel.
I still write fiction.
I still try to do a novel, which is a kind of mystery about a symphony orchestra.
But I'm probably going to start another fiction book.
And have you published any fiction, by the way?
No, I haven't.
So this is a... That's a dream.
True or not, I don't know.
Just looking briefly through the book here...
You know, it's really, you explain everything I need.
I don't have to... How much time did you spend on it?
I guess maybe you can tell me that.
I researched it.
I mean, I came back to Boston, which was... I mean, I didn't, in the end, use all the research I did.
In fact, there's about 300 pages missing from the book.
The history of the Boston Symphony, the history of music in the United States.
You know, all the stuff everybody does when they're trying to put off writing the hard bars.
Um...
And coming back to Boston was very important.
And then I spent a year writing it and a year rewriting it.
And we're talking to Harold Bloom, who's written a wonderful book called The Western Canon.
I have to say, in recent memory, I cannot recall a book of literary criticism that has prompted this much public response, general response.
Did you anticipate this?
No.
I can recall one such book, and I don't think I'm being vainglorious.
It was called The Book of Jay.
And it was what I wrote about what we now call Genesis, Exodus, and Numbers.
That was four or five years ago.
I have it in front of me as we speak.
But literary criticism, my part of it, which is the basic part of the book, I suppose it was taken since people in the United States so frequently receive
biblical criticism as being something other than literary criticism.
I suppose it was taken to be something that it was not.
But I didn't really know what to expect, sir.
I didn't know what to expect this time.
I thought that on the one hand, since it is more or less a kind of magnum opus, I'm in my 40th consecutive year of teaching full-time at Yale.
I'm 64, and I've been
an obsessive reader and writer all my life.
And this is a kind of summary, really, summing up of what I understand about the main course of Western literature from Dante to the present day.
I mean, it studies 26 authors whom I take as representative of the
canon.
I suppose that two factors that have so far on the whole aroused more interest than what I think matters about the book.
That is to say, 95% of the book is a study of 26 writers from Dante and Shakespeare and Chaucer and Milton and Montaigne and Molyer on through at the end, Proust and Beckett and
James Joyce and Virginia Woolf and Freud.
But most of the press and journalistic and most of the review attention has focused either on the canonical list that I get at the back and, in particular,
The contemporary part of it, particularly contemporary America.
Who you left out, basically.
They seem miffed by some of your omissions, I'm afraid.
A number of people seem to be miffed by some of your omissions.
I suppose that was inevitable because no two people are going to make the same list, and I don't really see why they should be miffed.
I don't pretend to be a canon maker, as I make very clear, and I even say that cultural prophecy is a mug's game.
I simply say that this is the best yes I can make on the basis of what I've read twice and thought could sustain real further rereading.
And it does represent a lifetime of reading, doesn't it?
It does represent that.
I mean, this could not have been written by a man of 44, shall we say.
No, I could not have written it at 44.
I could not have written it at 54.
I could only have written it now.
And, of course, the other thing that has aroused interest, and that is, I think, more legitimate, though it still is not, what matters about the book.
I mean, perhaps 5% of the text of the book, the opening chapter and the closing chapter, both of them deliberately calling themselves an elegy for the canon and an elegiate conclusion, are an attack upon...
the terrible degeneration of literary study in the universities and colleges and indeed in the secondary schools now as well.
That is to say, the replacement of aesthetic criteria by political and so-called multicultural criteria.
So-called, because I don't think it is multicultural, just as, you know,
what are called in our universities and colleges feminist literary criticism and marxist literary criticism and this that and the other kind of literature has nothing to do with marxism and absolutely nothing to do with feminism in the legitimate um political economic and social sense it is amazing that uh
I'm surprised now.
Are you still waiting for any of the big responses from the feminist critics, the so-called Marxist critics?
I think that they, well, some of them, of course, have gotten their shots in because journalists have gone to them.
For the quotes.
Some of them have, of course, their allies among the journalists in the book.
several times I describe what I call the School of Resentment as an academic journalistic network and I have heard from some members of the journalistic network but I suspect that the real response on the part of the School of Resentment will come in what they control they control the
so-called scholarly magazines and journals, which no longer are scholarly magazines and journals, but have been politicized and have nothing to do with learning.
In fact, as I have told several interviewers, but none as passionately as I'm saying this to you because you will understand this far better than the other interviewers because of your interests, one of the saddest things for me about a lifetime spent
at Yale University is that until about 15 years ago, if you wanted to praise a young man or a young woman who was a beginning scholar, you talked about their learning.
I haven't heard the word learning used either as a descriptive or eulogistic term at Yale University, certainly for the last decade.
Is this a pessimistic book, at least in the opening and the closing chapters?
Well, it's dialectical, isn't it?
I mean, I do think that the war I'm trying to fight against this goal of resentment is already a lost war.
The reviewer in the Sunday Times book review, I think that was Mr. Fruman of, is he the University of Minnesota?
Not a man that I know.
I think I read his book on Coleridge many years ago, but we've never met or corresponded or ever been in touch with each other.
What I thought was an intelligent and generous review, either he or the Times, the Sunday Times Book Review editors entitled it, Bloom et Thermopylae.
And I suppose that's the way I do feel about it.
On the basis of my observation of American universities and colleges, the study of the humanities, it's not doomed forever, but it's going through a very, very bad patch of...
which is likely to go well into the next generation because this goal of resentment is a network, and it has established itself everywhere.
And it's very active.
What it means by political, it turns out, has nothing to do with national politics or state politics or municipal politics, about which these people couldn't care less.
It strictly has to do with academic politics, at which they are superbly organized.
You do say, though, I have very little confidence that literary education will survive.
I have very little confidence, indeed, that literary education, in the sense in which I received a literary education as a Cornell undergraduate and then as a Yale graduate student that I've been trying to give myself all my life, I have very little confidence that that will survive.
Most of the departments of English throughout the country are already in the process of being renamed as departments of cultural studies.
And even when they aren't being renamed, in fact, the study of English and American or of world literature is in fact being replaced by what are called cultural studies.
which do not, of course, have aesthetic criteria.
To give you an example, just last week, I needed to read a copy of Cicero's Proarchia.
I couldn't find one here in central Massachusetts.
I had to go to the Boston Athenaeum.
...in the part of the country which buys the most books, which reads the most books, which has more university and college students... It's amazing, isn't it?
...than any other place in the country...
And you're talking about one of the foundation texts
of Latin culture.
And I'm not just making this up because I checked the computer to see where there were copies.
There were two copies in central Massachusetts.
One at a... There was not one.
Of course, Holy Cross is not on the network, so maybe they... I would hope that they would have one, but basically I had to go to Boston to get this book.
And I mean, it took me two or three days.
And then I was discussing with a young man who was a Harvard graduate, and I asked him if he knew what the proarchia was.
And I didn't know.
There was a time, even 30 years ago, when a Yale undergraduate who was a student of English and American literature not only would have known it, but would have read it.
Would indeed have probably learned a good deal of Latin as I did.
But those days are gone.
Now, how about the number 26?
Was this just because they were 26?
Purely arbitrary.
No mystical significance.
What happened was that I had originally hoped, very unrealistically, my dear, to write about at least 35 or 40 major writers and then discovered that it was impossible to say anything worthwhile about them without...
getting a book which would have been so outsized that I couldn't have had it published, and people couldn't afford to buy it, and nobody would have been able to read it.
So I just gave myself a few basic rules, which is that the very greatest Western writers, you know, Shakespeare and Chaucer, that is to say, it was partly because of this that I cut down the scope in time.
I had originally thought
But I would start with what the great Vico, whose scheme I, and as I said in the book, in a serial, comic way, adopted pretty much following Joyce and Finnegan's Wake, the Viconian vision of the cycles.
I had originally been going to start with the theocratic age, and I was going to talk about Homer, and I was going to talk about the Hebrew Bible, and I was going to talk about...
the Athenian dramatists, and I was going to talk about Plato, but of course that was impossible.
So I simply decided arbitrarily that I said to myself, well, what is the Western canon?
In the first place, more than any other single writer, it's Shakespeare, and in the second place, more than any other writer, even Homer, it's Dante.
And then I said, all right, I'll use Dante as the outer limit on one side,
and Samuel Beckett as the outer limit of the other.
I won't try to look at any living writer, you know, no Garcia Marquez or Thomas Pynchon or any living poet whatsoever.
And then I thought of, all right, who are the overwhelming figures in the major Western languages?
I mean, who is the center of the national canon in each country?
And, of course, it's possible to establish that to some degree,
But then complications arose there also.
This Pushkin is generally taken as the center as well as the real thought of the Russian canon.
But I decided that for a Western reader in general, Tolstoy is the more important figure.
And you didn't include Dostoevsky, of course.
Well, I couldn't.
I had a problem.
I thought of having Dostoevsky as a sort of dark twin to Tolstoy.
And then I realized, well, I was getting into trouble about space again.
In the end,
It's fair to say that, and of course some figures are there to represent, for instance, Hispanic American culture there in Borges and Neruda.
I think that there are greater writers of narrative alive in Borges' time than Borges himself, though he's a very brilliant and fascinating writer.
But he seemed to be the starting point of modern Hispanic American literature.
It's ironic, I thought, that I wound up with only two 20th century poets, Neruda and Pessoa.
I would not for one moment say that the greatest poets of the 20th century are Neruda and Pessoa, though Pessoa in particular, the Portuguese poet, absolutely fascinates me.
I would certainly say that William Butler Yeats and Wallace Stevens and Rania Maria Rilke and Paul Valery and Eugenio Montale
and Hart Crane and Federico Garcia Lorca, you know, are greater poets than Neruda and Pessoa.
But it was a question of being representative, being representative of the different major Western traditions.
So in the end, these are the 26 I wound up with.
But it's purely arbitrary.
It could as well have been 22 or 30.
there were questions of limitation I'm curious in the appendices at the back of the list when you do the Greek the plays you have three different translations of Sophocles for instance well what I tried to do when it came to translations if there was no translation in English that overwhelmingly struck me as indeed being overwhelming
far superior to all the others, and I simply listed the work without picking a translation, where it had been my experience that a particular translator had done better with a particular play than anyone else had, at least in my judgment of it, than I put that in.
But I didn't want to actually bother to say that.
I'm curious also that you include a translation of Dante in Terzo Rima, which I've never seen.
Well, I thought that I wanted to try to give people who read no Italian some sense of what Dante is like.
The most useful translation into modern English is beyond any question the Sinclair, the John Deese translation.
Yes, that's wonderful.
in those three Oxford paper black volumes, but it is a prose translation.
Very good, accurate prose, at times very strong prose.
But then I thought, well, you want something that gives the effect of the terturema.
There are a lot of different possibilities, but I thought that in the end, the Lawrence Binion one, probably,
came closer to doing the impossible than anybody else does.
Not for quotation, but what did you think of Mandelbaum's translation?
Is it not for quotation?
I'm sorry?
Not for quotation.
Yeah, not for quotation.
It always seems to me that Mandelbaum, whom I know and whom I honor for his learning and his ingenuity, that he always just sort of misses as a translator.
His Virgil I just don't find as effective as Robert Fitzgerald's.
His Dante, I don't find as effective as several rival Dante translators, and so it goes.
Do you subscribe to Hazlitt's comment, which you quote at the back of the book, I have more confidence in the dead than the living?
It's a wonderful quote we're talking about.
Well, if only because, as he says, and I quoted it,
Partly as a kind of warning to myself.
It is very difficult because you've been an active critic all your life, and I have.
You make a lot of close friends.
Sometimes you make them because, you know, you admire the writer and you write some reviews of the writer that matter to the writer.
But Philip Roth and I are now very close friends.
I don't think that affects my judgment of his work because of the stuff that I wrote about him, which caused the friendship to develop, long preceded my knowing the man.
I love Roth, I have to say.
I really think that setting aside the major pension, that is to say pension when he was at his best, Vineland, I carefully left out of my list because I think it's garbage.
But Roth at this point, I would think,
is really, in proportion to the real merits of his recent work, the most undervalued contemporary American novelist.
Operation Shylock was a very great book, which sold scandalously few copies.
People just have this perception of him, which is, of course, they don't read anymore, so that's the problem.
Harold, he said, you know that with each of my important books, I sell fewer copies than the one before.
He said, with an occasional exception like Patrimony, which became a bestseller, and was about the father-son relationship, and it's after all a memoir, but he says with the novels, he said, he's beginning to believe that the real problem is that as his older readers die off, they're not being replaced by younger readers, because people just don't really read seriously and deeply anymore.
You use the Kermody, quote, canons are instruments of survival.
I've just pulled these out.
I wonder if you could comment on that in your own response to that.
Well, I think they are instruments of survival.
And, of course, now it's become very complicated because what Sir Frank means there is institutional and societal survival.
I have even greater doubts than he does about the institutional and perhaps even societal survival of a great part of the canon.
Thus, my whole life long I have fiercely loved and indeed frequently taught the poetry of Edmund Spencer, the Fairy Queen in particular, but it's perfectly clear to me that the Fairy Queen, which used to be read by every Yale undergraduate who majored in English, is now read
by very few undergraduates anywhere in the United States, and is becoming a specialized text for a handful of scholars, which is a great sadness because it's a very great and powerful work.
And I'm sure that there are any number of great unread works, aren't there?
Yes, my dear, and there are going to be more.
I despair, for instance, and I say this in the book after I have lovingly analyzed Finnegan's Wake in relation to Shakespeare.
I remark, I think, with some authentic despair that here is a work that I believe, with the exception of Proust, is the greatest thing the 20th century has to offer us in the way of high imaginative literature, more powerful even than Joyce's Ulysses, but that I believe its ultimate survival possibilities are very low.
But isn't that work in particular almost impenetrable, though, to most readers?
Well, I think...
It demands a tremendous amount of labor.
As say, Blake's epics initially demand a tremendous amount of labor.
But it rewards the labor.
And in fact, it may sound silly of me to say this because I've read it so often and taught it so often and thought my way through it so often, but it doesn't seem to me a particularly difficult book.
You just have to, it all depends whether or not you're prepared to enjoy it.
that kind of fabulous wordplay.
But, you know, in that regard, it resembles one of my favorite plays by Shakespeare, Love's Labour's Lost.
That's one of your favorite plays.
Oh, it's the most amazing feast of language.
It's a great extravaganza of crazy language and has a great deal in common in many ways with Finnegan's Wake.
Amazing.
I'm very partial to The Tempest for a number of personal reasons.
I just... Well, my dear, I'm very...
I mean, of Shakespeare's 38 plays, as I remarked somewhere in the book, 24 seemed to me to be absolute masterpieces.
Now Shakespeare is probably, and of course Dante, I think, except in Italy, is probably doomed.
I mean, he has always had the same effect upon major Western poets that Shakespeare has had upon the world in general.
But I believe that outside of Italy that will vanish because we are entering, well,
a new theocratic age, which I just don't believe that sort of technocrat theocratic age.
You know, we were talking earlier about the Tertzerima.
I love the books, and I can't read a word of Italian, but I love the books with the facing pages where you can read the Italian and just, you know, taste the flavor of these words.
But I think that may go also a lot, a lot,
Alas.
That is... I mean, one is reasonably certain that Shakespeare will survive any politicizing, any multiculturalizing, and so on and so forth, because I think we just can't do without him.
And after all, he will survive in performance, even though most contemporary performances of Shakespeare, particularly in this country, are the most amazing travestis by the time the directors... I'm laughing because I've seen a few.
I remember I saw...
Was it at Richard III at Stratford?
It's going to be 15 years ago.
I mean, it was just... No, I have not seen Shakespeare properly done in this country for a very long time.
And I think...
These days they politicize it to death in one way or another.
And yet through it all, as you point out in the book, the universality of the man always manages to shine through.
I'm curious also that when you discuss Whitman, of the nine editions of Leaves of Grass, you pick the first one.
And why is that?
I mean, he felt he was constantly improving right up until the night.
But it wasn't true, I'm afraid.
The three great editions of Leaves of Grass are the first three.
The first one, which is much the best, I think.
It has the best text of the then-untitled poem that eventually would be called Song of Myself.
The second one, which has the initial appearance of the poem called Sundown Poem there,
but eventually it's called Crossing Brooklyn Ferry.
That is to say, the first edition is 1855, the second is 1856, and then the great third edition, which introduces the great sea drift pieces, eventually called As I Ever the Ocean of Life and Out of the Cradle Endlessly Rotten.
Once you get past those three editions, all the changes that Whitman tends to make and all the new poems that he adds,
with the single exception of the one great poem, but it isn't The Leaves of Grass, it's The Drum Taps, in 1865, The Memories of President Lincoln's section, which features, of course, the great lilac trilogy, which I do discuss at some length in the book, and which is as powerful as Edward Whitman ever wrote.
But by and large, I think one could forget the last six editions.
including the famous Deathbed edition.
Which I have.
I've got about four.
I think I've got four of the various editions.
And I may even have a third.
I'm going to check.
It's been a couple of years since I checked.
It's a very good reprint of the third, edited by Roy Harvey Pierce, which was available in paperback and possibly still is available in paperback.
And there are, of course, several reprint editions of the third.
What do you feel about, I mean, this is straying a bit, about writers tinkering with completed work like that?
I mean, Henry James did fool around with some.
There's no ground rule that will work with this.
It seems to me that W.H.
Auden, for instance, who I think is somewhat overrated as a poet anyway, though I have, of course, agreed to his canonical status, I think that Auden tended to mar what he did by revision.
I think that Whitman intended tomorrow what he did by revision, even to censor himself.
But Henry James, I would put on the other side.
It seems to me that the New York edition gives you more powerful text.
For instance, the New York edition of The Portrait of a Lady is a substantially different and more powerful novel than the original Portrait of a Lady.
And the Portrait of...
isabel archer which is a great thing in the book is